.\" Copyright (c) 2017-2018 Two Sigma Open Source, LLC.
.\" All Rights Reserved
.\"
.\" Distributed under the terms of the 2-clause BSD License. The full
.\" license is in the file LICENSE, distributed as part of this software.
.Dd Feb 07, 2018
.Dt MBEAT 8
.Os UNIX
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpub
.Nd multicast heartbeat publisher
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl b Ar bsz
.Op Fl c Ar cnt
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl k Ar key
.Op Fl l
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl o Ar off
.Op Fl p Ar num
.Op Fl s Ar dur
.Op Fl t Ar ttl
.Op Fl v
.Sm off
.Em iface
.Ns =
.Em maddr
.Sm on
.Bo
iface=maddr ...
.Bc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility publishes multicast UDP datagrams to a set of network endpoints. It can
be used in conjunction with the
.Xr msub 8
utility to test, debug and verify network configurations.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ar iface
.Ns Network interface that will be used for publishing datagrams, e.g.
.Em eth0 .
.
.It Ar maddr
Multicast network address in the IPv4 family, written in the dotted quad
.Ns notation, e.g.
.Em 239.192.40.1 .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
The utility accepts the following command-line options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl b, -buffer-size Ar bsz
Sets the socket send buffer to the specified size (see MEMORY SIZE FORMAT).
This setting is used for all endpoints.  If not specified, the value defaults
to the kernel default.
.
.It Fl c, -count Ar cnt
Sets the number of outgoing datagrams per endpoint.
If not specified, the value defaults to
.Em 5 .
.
.It Fl e, -exit-on-error
The process will terminate when the first publishing error is encountered.
If not specified, the process will only print the relevant error message.
.
.It Fl h, -help
Prints the usage message.
.
.It Fl k, -key Ar key
Sets the key of each outgoing mbeat payload (see FLOW IDENTIFICATION). If not
specified, a random value is generated.
.
.It Fl l, -loopback
Enables local delivery for published multicast datagrams.
.
.It Fl n, -no-color
Disables the usage of colors in the logging output.
.
.It Fl o, -offset Ar off
Sets the offset from which all published payload sequence numbers will
start. The default is
.Em 0 .
.
.It Fl p, -port Ar num
Specify the UDP port of all created endpoints. The default value is
.Em 22999 .
.
.It Fl s, -sleep-time Ar dur
Sets the sleep duration between outgoing datagrams per endpoint to
the specified duration (see DURATION FORMAT). If not specified, the
interval defaults to
.Em 1
second.
.
.It Fl t, -time-to-live Ar ttl
Sets the Time-To-Live property of each outgoing datagram.
If not specified, the value defaults to
. Em 64 .
.
.It Fl v, -verbose
Enables more verbose logging. Repeating this flag will turn on more
detailed levels of logging messages: INFO, DEBUG, and TRACE.
.El
.Sh ENDPOINTS
The positional arguments of the utility are endpoints: an ordered tuple
consisting of local interface name, multicast group and the multicast port. It
is possible to specify up to 83886080 endpoints.

.Sh FLOW IDENTIFICATION
In order to support multiple simultaneous runs of the tool, the publisher can
stamp the payload with a key - a 64-bit unsigned integer - that identifies the
set of outgoing packets. Similarly the subscriber utility is able to filter out
everything but a given key.

.Sh MEMORY SIZE FORMAT
The memory size has to be specified by an unsigned integer, followed by a
memory unit. An example of a valid memory size is
.Em 1KB .
Supported units are:
.Em B ,
.Em KB ,
.Em K ,
.Em MB ,
.Em M ,
.Em GB ,
.Em G .
All units are accepted case-insensitive. Zero memory size is allowed, e.g.
.Em 0B .
.
.Sh DURATION FORMAT
The time duration has to be specified by an unsigned integer, followed by a
time unit. An example of a valid duration is
.Em 1s .
Supported units are:
.Em ns ,
.Em us ,
.Em ms ,
.Em s ,
.Em m ,
.Em h ,
.Em d .
Zero duration is allowed, e.g.
.Em 0ms .
.
.Sh PAYLOAD FORMAT
The format of the payload is binary. All numeric fields are unsigned
integers in network byte order, while the 64-bit numbers are split into high
and low 32-bits, encoded in the network byte order. The total payload size is
128 bytes. All valid payloads must start with a magic number
.Em 0x6d626974 ,
which is a big-endian equivalent of four ASCII letters
.Qq mbit .
The current format version is
.Em 4 .
Each payload contains the following fields in order:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent 
.It
magic value (4 bytes)
.It
format version number (1 byte)
.It
source Time-To-Live value (1 byte)
.It
multicast port (2 bytes)
.It
multicast group (4 bytes)
.It
time of departure nanoseconds part (4 bytes)
.It
time of departure UNIX timestamp (8 bytes)
.It
key (8 bytes)
.It
sequence interation counter (8 bytes)
.It
sequence length (8 bytes)
.It
publisher interface name (16 bytes)
.It
publisher hostname (64 bytes)
.El
.Sh EXIT CODE 
The process returns
.Em 0
on success,
. Em 1
on failure. Warnings and errors are printed to the standard error stream.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Daniel Lovasko Aq Mt dlovasko@twosigma.com
.Sh ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The project was initially developed in collaboration with Reenen Kroukamp.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr msub 8 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr send 2
