.\" Copyright (c) 2017-2018 Two Sigma Open Source, LLC.
.\" All Rights Reserved
.\"
.\" Distributed under the terms of the 2-clause BSD License. The full
.\" license is in the file LICENSE, distributed as part of this software.
.Dd Feb 05, 2018
.Dt MBEAT 8
.Os UNIX
.Sh NAME
.Nm msub
.Nd network heartbeat subscriber
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl b Ar bsz
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl f Ar pre
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl o Ar off
.Op Fl p Ar num
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl s Ar sid
.Op Fl t Ar ttl
.Op Fl u
.Op Fl v
.Sm off
.Em iface
.Ns =
.Em maddr
.Sm on
.Bo
iface=maddr ...
.Bc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility subscribes to UDP datagrams for a set of network endpoints. It can be
used in conjunction with the
.Xr mpub 8
utility to test, debug and verify network configurations.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ar iface
.Ns Network interface that will be used for publishing datagrams, e.g.
.Em eth0 .
.
.It Ar maddr
Multicast network address in the IPv4 family, written in the dotted quad
.Ns notation, e.g.
.Em 239.192.40.1 .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
The utility accepts the following command-line options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl b Ar bsz
Sets the socket send buffer to the specified size (see MEMORY SIZE FORMAT).
This setting is used for all endpoints.  If not specified, the value defaults
to the kernel default.
.
.It Fl e
The process will terminate when the first receiving error is encountered.
If not specified, the process will only print the relevant error message.
.
.It Fl f Ar pre
Selects the sub-second decimal precision of arrival and departure timestamps.
.
.It Fl h
Prints the usage message.
.
.It Fl o Ar off
Sets the sequence number offset, so that all mbeat payloads with sequence
number lesser than
.Ar off
are ignored. All subsequent sequence numbers are printed shifted by the
.Ar off
value. The default value is
.Em 0 .
.
.It Fl p Ar num
Specify the UDP port of all created endpoints. The default value is
.Em 22999 .
.
.It Fl r
Enables the raw binary output instead of the default CSV (see OUTPUT FORMAT).
.
.It Fl s Ar sid
Sets the session ID filter on incoming mbeat payloads, so that only those
with session ID equal to
.Ar sid
get printed out (see SESSION IDENTIFICATION). If not specified, all payloads
are accepted.
.
.It Fl u
Disables output buffering.
.
.It Fl v
Enables more verbose logging. Repeating this flag will turn on more
detailed levels of logging messages: INFO, DEBUG, and TRACE.
.El
.Sh ENDPOINTS
The positional arguments of the utility are endpoints: an ordered tuple
consisting of local interface name, multicast group and the multicast port. It
is possible to specify up to 83886080 endpoints.
.Sh SESSION IDENTIFICATION
In order to support multiple simultaneous runs of the tool, the publisher can
stamp the payload with a session ID - a 64-bit unsigned integer - that
identifies the set of outgoing packets. Similarly the subscriber utility is
able to filter out everything but a given session ID.
.Sh MEMORY SIZE FORMAT
The memory size has to be specified by an unsigned integer, followed by a
memory unit. An example of a valid memory size is
.Em 1KB .
Supported units are:
.Em B ,
.Em KB ,
.Em K ,
.Em MB ,
.Em M ,
.Em GB ,
.Em G .
All units are accepted case-insensitive. Zero memory size is allowed, e.g.
.Em 0B .
.
.Sh PAYLOAD FORMAT
The format of the payload is binary. All numeric fields are unsigned
integers in network byte order, while the 64-bit numbers are split into high
and low 32-bits, encoded in the network byte order. The total payload size is
128 bytes. All valid payloads must start with a magic number
.Em 0x6d626974 ,
which is a big-endian equivalent of four ASCII letters
.Qq mbit .
The current format version is
.Em 2 .
Each payload contains the following fields in order:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent 
.It
magic value (4 bytes)
.It
format version number (1 byte)
.It
source Time-To-Live value (1 byte)
.It
multicast port (2 bytes)
.It
multicast group (4 bytes)
.It
time of departure nanoseconds part (4 bytes)
.It
time of departure UNIX timestamp (8 bytes)
.It
session ID (8 bytes)
.It
sequence interation counter (8 bytes)
.It
sequence length (8 bytes)
.It
publisher interface name (16 bytes)
.It
publisher hostname (64 bytes)
.El
.Sh OUTPUT FORMAT - COMMA-SEPARATED VALUES 
The default output format is ASCII-encoded CSV file complaint with the 
.Em RFC4180
standard. The table has the following column headers (listed in order):
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
SID
.It
SeqNum
.It
SeqLen
.It
McastAddr
.It
McastPort
.It
SrcTTL
.It
DstTTL
.It
PubIf
.It
PubHost
.It
SubIf
.It
SubHost
.It
TimeDep
.It
TimeArr
.El
.Sh OUTPUT FORMAT - RAW BINARY
The raw binary format re-uses the exact structure of the payload, while
appending
.Em 7
more fields:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
interface name on the receivers end (16 bytes)
.It
host name on the receivers end (64 bytes)
.It
time of arrival UNIX timestamp (8 bytes)
.It
time of arrival nanoseconds part (4 bytes)
.It
destination Time-To-Live value availability (1 byte)
.It
destination Time-To-Live value (1 byte)
.It
padding - unused (2 bytes)
.El
.Pp
Unlike the CSV format, there is no header entry in raw binary. Unlike the
on-wire payload representation, data is outputted in the host byte order.
.Sh EXIT CODE
The process returns
.Em 0
on success,
.Em 1
on failure.
Normal program output is printed on the standard output stream, while warnings
and errors appear on the standard error stream.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Daniel Lovasko Aq Mt dlovasko@twosigma.com
.Sh ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The project was initially developed in collaboration with Reenen Kroukamp.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mpub 8 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr recv 2 ,
.Xr select 2
